stakeholders : ceo and directors or investors of project
scrum : framework to deal with complex work (project management method)
artifacts : objects/tool made by humans. 
artifact  example: shopping list
scrum has 3 artefacts :
1 product backlog
2 sprint backlog
3 increment or product increment
it s goal : work value and transparency inspection  adaptation
each scrum artifacts commitments :
product backlog : product goal and long term objective
sprint backlog : sprint goal define by scrum team, every sprints brings closer to the product goal
increment : commitment to the definition of done (the desired quality product should have)
commitment : dedicated to achieve something specific also why the work is important and what is the desired outcome. so Clear goals and dedication
most product develop by originations has their own goals and  larger visions
example : apple best product, macdo best fast food experience ...
Visions are created without knowing how to do it, technologies or experience
to rich the vison, we have to go to multiple milestones/baby steps goals.  you have to break down large goals into clear and achievable steps.
sprint goal : every objective achieved bring you closer to product goal
product goal : long term objective, important step toward product vision
and there is one  product goal at a time (single direction at a time)
product vision goal (not required in scrum) 1 year, 10 years, ... but can make sense to create one.
scrum participants goes toward sprint goal, product goal, product vision
a goal helps on one direction and focus on transparency,  inspection ( on the right track ), adaptation (changes if needed )
Artefact product backlog: accumulation of unfinished work ( like a to-do-list ) 
to reach one goal related to the product. Usually they start unorder then we order them.
transparency : refine the task if not clear with concise/precisions words
inspection : process of looking at backlog and observing current conditions
adaptation : something is missing, wrong, unclear, and needs to be changed 
refinement : backlog needs to be continuously improved, clarifying details, questions, adding new things
product backlog is designed for : transparency, inspection, adapation
prod bg is an ordered list of everting needed in the product
can contain new feature (functionnalities), improvments to existing once,
fixes or changes.
prod bg items : acronym "PBI" 
composition/attribute of an item :
1) description
2) order
3) size
4) value
5) acceptance criteria
the only person accountable for pd bg is the prodcut owner
prduct backlog changes = changes activites in pd bg
management pd bg :
starts with a goal or vision, PO defines objectives to be achieved, he collaborates with stakeholders and add new features, ideas to pd bg
protocole : only having items that help to reach the product goal
product goal : commitment for the product backlog
no goal competes in parallels and for more attention (only 1 pr g at a time)
PO can add remove order PBIS when he want and work close with IT
During pd bg refinment : IT and PO collaborate on breaking down larger items into smaller ones that are easier to describe and develop. Smaller is better
also work on any details, size, order
size/estimation : how small or big the effort is
Developers are responsible for sizing
po and dev collaborates to understand the items and often finding ways to reduce complexity by making tradoffs (negociate)
pr bg is never complete or final and constantly change, it grows with the product it self and changes based on business requirements, market ..
items that the top are ready for the next spring and are small enough, detailes, and immediately actionable (dev can start right away on it)
Life of PO :
Define a product goal, and start the PD BG before the sprint begings. Remember : PO is accountable for defining PG and manage the PD BG
Scrum no detail planned at the begining.
example PG : reach 10000 users in the next 6 month, then add list of small feature in the PD BG. any idea or feature will end up in the PD BG.
Once set in the PDBG they wont mean a lot so Owner will work with developers to add more details so in PBI'S with 
1) description 2) order 3) size 4) value 5) acceptance criteria.
this is not scrum and not mandatory but in practice Teams use users stories :
short description of feature explained from perspective of person who desired the functionality.
3 step process : card conversation confirmation.
Card : paper card size (post it) holds a brief description
conversation : as a < user > i want < some objective > so that < get some outcome >  ( Who what why : benefit of implementing user story, has value and not something no body want )
confirmation : acceptance criteria : a way to test if story is complete
order of PDBG : from top to bottom.
Everting's needs to be done for the product must go to PD BG (feature, bug, .. or anithing else related to product) and PO can add edit into it.
next step is to clarify details, order makes sense, estimate.
esitiame = sizing = guess of effort necessary to carry a task
sprint planning meeting : Po explains what needs to be done to increase value of product and entire team formulates a sprint goal



