https://capgemini.udemy.com/course/agile-scrum-for-beginners-scrum-master-certification-preparation/learn/lecture/24445878#overview

stakeholders : ceo and directors or investors of project
scrum : framework to deal with complex work (project management method)
artifacts : objects/tool made by humans. 
artifact  example: shopping list
scrum has 3 artefacts :
1 product backlog
2 sprint backlog
3 increment or product increment
it s goal : work value and transparency inspection  adaptation
each scrum artifacts commitments :
product backlog : product goal and long term objective
sprint backlog : sprint goal define by scrum team, every sprints brings closer to the product goal
increment : commitment to the definition of done (the desired quality product should have)
commitment : dedicated to achieve something specific also why the work is important and what is the desired outcome. so Clear goals and dedication
most product develop by originations has their own goals and  larger visions
example : apple best product, macdo best fast food experience ...
Visions are created without knowing how to do it, technologies or experience
to rich the vison, we have to go to multiple milestones/baby steps goals.  you have to break down large goals into clear and achievable steps.
sprint goal : every objective achieved bring you closer to product goal
product goal : long term objective, important step toward product vision
and there is one  product goal at a time (single direction at a time)
product vision goal (not required in scrum) 1 year, 10 years, ... but can make sense to create one.
scrum participants goes toward sprint goal, product goal, product vision
a goal helps on one direction and focus on transparency,  inspection ( on the right track ), adaptation (changes if needed )
Artefact product backlog: accumulation of unfinished work ( like a to-do-list ) 
to reach one goal related to the product. Usually they start unorder then we order them.
transparency : refine the task if not clear with concise/precisions words
inspection : process of looking at backlog and observing current conditions
adaptation : something is missing, wrong, unclear, and needs to be changed 
refinement : backlog needs to be continuously improved, clarifying details, questions, adding new things
product backlog is designed for : transparency, inspection, adapation
prod bg is an ordered list of everting needed in the product
can contain new feature (functionnalities), improvments to existing once,
fixes or changes.
prod bg items : acronym "PBI" 
composition/attribute of an item :
1) description
2) order
3) size
4) value
5) acceptance criteria
the only person accountable for pd bg is the prodcut owner
prduct backlog changes = changes activites in pd bg
management pd bg :
starts with a goal or vision, PO defines objectives to be achieved, he collaborates with stakeholders and add new features, ideas to pd bg
protocole : only having items that help to reach the product goal
product goal : commitment for the product backlog
no goal competes in parallels and for more attention (only 1 pr g at a time)
PO can add remove order PBIS when he want and work close with IT
During pd bg refinment : IT and PO collaborate on breaking down larger items into smaller ones that are easier to describe and develop. Smaller is better
also work on any details, size, order
size/estimation : how small or big the effort is
Developers are responsible for sizing
po and dev collaborates to understand the items and often finding ways to reduce complexity by making tradoffs (negociate)
pr bg is never complete or final and constantly change, it grows with the product it self and changes based on business requirements, market ..
items that the top are ready for the next spring and are small enough, detailes, and immediately actionable (dev can start right away on it)
Life of PO :
Define a product goal, and start the PD BG before the sprint begings. Remember : PO is accountable for defining PG and manage the PD BG
Scrum no detail planned at the begining.
example PG : reach 10000 users in the next 6 month, then add list of small feature in the PD BG. any idea or feature will end up in the PD BG.
Once set in the PDBG they wont mean a lot so Owner will work with developers to add more details so in PBI'S with 
1) description 2) order 3) size 4) value 5) acceptance criteria.
this is not scrum and not mandatory but in practice Teams use users stories :
short description of feature explained from perspective of person who desired the functionality.
3 step process : card conversation confirmation.
Card : paper card size (post it) holds a brief description
conversation : as a < user > i want < some objective > so that < get some outcome >  ( Who what why : benefit of implementing user story, has value and not something no body want )
confirmation : acceptance criteria : a way to test if story is complete
order of PDBG : from top to bottom.
Everting's needs to be done for the product must go to PD BG (feature, bug, .. or anithing else related to product) and PO can add edit into it.
next step is to clarify details, order makes sense, estimate.
esitiame = sizing = guess of effort necessary to carry a task
sprint planning meeting : Po explains what needs to be done to increase value of product and entire team formulates a sprint goal
by collaborating with PO, DEV's will decide wich items from top form PD BG to add to the sprint backlog. Sprint BG will also contain a plan to deliver product increment
and realise the sprint goal.
diff sprint back log and PD BG : PDBG, order list of features, ideas, fix... (PBI's). SP BG created at begining of every sprint and contains PBI's done in the current sprint
+ plan + sprint goal. All items from SPG comes from PD BG
Plan : decomposition of each PBIS in smaller work units (often called 'TASKS') to build increment
PBIS reprensent the 'what' will be deliverd , plan : 'how' wil it happen, sprint goal : 'why' is the sprint valuable (guidance and flexibility )
dev's created a forecast for what will be delivered, it is not a garantie
SPBG makes transparency and commitment to those tasks 
SPGB is like a temporary artefacts that exist during the sprint. Every sprint will have a new SPBG and any unfinished work are putting back in PD BG
and owner decides what happen next. PDBG is owner accountability and SPBG it is Devs accountability. Devs owns SPBG and PO can not make changes without collaborate first
devs will modify SPBG if they think it is necessary.
Total work remaining from SPBG is tracked every daily scrum
When devs selected PBIS they go from top to bottom (order is important and is the same as PDBG) if they want to change the order they have to convice PO.
After PBIS are selected a sprint goal is set example : 'Feature the most popular product on the homepage' even if the goal is simple it describes what should happen
a Goal helps devs to go on the same direction + flexibility. 
SPBG is a temporary artefact that has items from PDBG and PDGB has the rest of the items
during the sprint devs and po will continue to refine items in the PDBG in preparation for the upcoming sprint.
Items from SPBG is the same as PBIS but it s that some PBIS have been moved to SPBG. if devs wants during the sprint they can take more items from PDBG or put back if
they think they took too much but they need aggreement with PO.
SPBG is negociable, sprint goal is fixed.
Sprint planning meeting : devs plan items, divide/break down items into tasks
diff between sprint scope and sprint goal :
scope of sprint BG : can be renegociated and sprint goal don't change during the sprint.
scope are the amount of work to reach a goal :
example : goal : cleaning on weekend, scope : clean the bathroom task, vacum task , .. scope you can change it or remove one taks
or reduce it but goal has to remain the same.
Scope of SPBG: amount of slected PBIS
product increment = new version of product, in addition of previous sprints. Devs deliver at least a new product increment after each sprint, each increment is
an improvment vesrion of the product

